Fresh off the heels of the Iran war and
the intervention in Venezuela, Cuba
increasingly appears to be next. Earlier
this month, Donald Trump hinted as much
saying, "We may stop by Cuba after we're
finished with this." That wasn't an
isolated comment. In recent weeks, Trump
has repeatedly suggested that Cuba will
be next on the agenda, but it's not
clear what the plan is. In fact, Trump's
approach thus far has been unpredictable
and that may be part of a strategy to
keep the Cubans guessing. What is clear,
however, is that Trump needs a political
win. Much of his support base has grown
uneasy over the Iran conflict and some
within the executive office see Cuba as
a relatively easy victory that could
help rally the president's support base.
A Miami Herald poll published on April
16th found that 79% of Cubans and Cuban
Americans in South Florida support some
form of US military intervention in
Cuba. But unlike the operation against
Maduro, where the US Navy spent months
building up forces around Venezuela, any
action against Cuba could be launched
directly from bases inside the United
States. That means military intervention
in Cuba could come about much more
suddenly with little warning.
Suppose that happens, the operation
could take different forms. It could be
a quick raid to capture senior leaders
such as Diaz-Canel or a larger air
campaign targeting key military and
government sites. In the most extreme
scenario, the US could launch a full
invasion to remove the Cuban government
and replace it with one more subservient
to Washington, though that remains
unlikely.
Either way, regime change in Cuba
appears to be in the works. Trump sees
Cuba as an opportunity to regain
political momentum at home, while Rubio
could use the issue to position himself
for higher office. That's how these
things go. Some conflicts begin at the
border, others begin at the polling
numbers.
Today's video is sponsored by Supremacy
World War 3, a free online strategy game
where you choose a real country to lead
into a modern global conflict. Up to 99
other players are moving their units
across the map in real time. So, to win,
you need to form alliances and construct
all types of units, including tanks,
jets, and submarines.
Supremacy World War 3 is a huge game.
The key to victory is to think ahead and
build alliances. What I like most about
the game is that you can play with the
same account on both PC and mobile. That
convenience sets it apart from other
games.
Also, they've just started season 20,
Underworld Protocol, which introduces
new mercenaries and shadowy deals that
could turn the tide of war, which are
done quietly and discreetly on the black
market. Using our link below, you will
get an exclusive gift, an elite railgun,
a brand new unit in the game worth $40.
The offer is only available to new
players for the next 30 days. So, get
started sooner rather than later.
Ever since Fidel Castro took power in
Havana in 1959, every American president
has struggled with the question of what
to do about Cuba. In the decades
following the communist takeover, the
country has had just two other leaders,
Fidel's brother Raul, who stepped down
in 2018, and his successor, Diaz-Canel,
who now serves as the first secretary of
the Communist Party.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union,
US policy toward Cuba flip-flopped
between escalation and engagement.
President Clinton signed the Cuban
Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act,
which strengthened the US embargo and
set stringent conditions for the removal
of sanctions.
President Obama, by contrast, believed
that the policy of isolating Cuba had
failed. He kept the trade embargo
intact, but restored diplomatic
relations with Havana, relaxed economic
sanctions, and removed Cuba's
designation as a state sponsor of
terrorism. Immediately thereafter, the
Cubans launched moderate economic
reforms. They permitted more small
private businesses, loosened rules on
foreign investment, and downsized the
state's payroll. Yet, despite the
optimism, it quickly became clear that
Havana was not prepared for genuine
economic change.
Hardliners in the Cuban government
belittled Obama's policy as a Trojan
horse that would bring unwelcome
political change and unleash economic
forces that Havana could not control.
Ultimately, the reforms simply fell
short of expectations.
So, by the time Trump entered the White
House in 2017, there was little to stop
him from rolling back Obama's
normalization efforts.
Sure enough, a few months into his first
term, Trump enacted hundreds of measures
tightening sanctions against Cuba,
including restrictions on flights,
remittances, and travel to the country.
Cuba's economy has remained in decline
ever since.
During his second term, in January 2026
to be precise, Trump amped up his
maximum pressure campaign against Cuba.
It was part of a broader strategy to
assert American primacy in the Western
Hemisphere and limit the influence of
China and Russia. The move came just
after the capture of Venezuelan
President Maduro, who happened to be a
key ally of Cuba. Later that month,
Trump signed an executive order that
deemed Cuba an extraordinary threat to
US national security. That same document
provides a legal framework for slapping
30% tariffs on any country that supplies
oil to Cuba. Shortly afterward, fuel
tankers turned around and suppliers
stopped delivering to the island. Havana
is now closer to an outright blockade
than at any point since the 1962
missile crisis. And the fuel shortage is
undermining the state's ability to
provide basic services.
For reference, Cuba needs about 100,000
barrels of oil per day to sustain its
civil service, but it produces only
40,000. The rest comes from abroad. This
year, Cuba has so far received an 85,000
barrel shipment from Mexico on January
9th, followed by another 100,000 barrel
delivery from Russia on March 30th. But
beyond that, there has been little
additional supply in 2026.
Almost no oil is reaching Cuba anymore.
Not from Venezuela, Mexico, Algeria,
Angola, Brazil, Russia, or virtually
anywhere else.
As a result, basic services are now
collapsing in real time, and the country
is going through its worst economic
crisis since the 1990s.
Gasoline and medicine are in short
supply, power outages have become
routine, food prices have jumped, and
mosquito-transmitted disease outbreaks
have overwhelmed the public health
system.
Many of these complications had been
building for years, but Trump's maximum
pressure campaign has exacerbated the
crisis. There are now lines at gas
stations that stretch for hours, schools
are suspending classes, hospitals are
canceling surgeries, and waste is piling
up on the streets since most garbage
trucks are out of service.
With pressure mounting on multiple
fronts, Havana has little room left to
maneuver. Trump is likely sensing as
much. In Washington, there is a growing
belief that the Cuban state is at its
most vulnerable point in decades, and
the White House appears determined to
exploit that opening and coerce Havana
toward political change. Against that
backdrop, the Pentagon is now drawing up
a range of military options for possible
action against Cuba. Quietly, but
steadily, the situation is beginning to
drift toward something far more
dangerous.
In spite of Trump's belligerent
rhetoric, diplomatic channels remain
open. In April, a US State Department
delegation visited Havana, making it the
first time a US government aircraft had
landed in Cuba since the short-lived
reengagement under the Obama
administration. The Americans brought
with them a laundry list of demands,
including compensation for American
residents and corporations whose assets
were confiscated after the 1959
revolution, the release of political
prisoners, and greater political
freedoms for the Cuban population.
That first point, compensation for lost
property, is really at the heart of the
issue, though, particularly among the
Cuban diaspora in the United States.
Delivering some form of compensation
would go a long way toward securing a
political win in South Florida ahead of
the midterm elections in November. Of
course, a deal with Cuba would also
create economic prospects for American
companies, most immediately through the
opening of the island's tourism sector.
And in the longer term, the potential
for broader investment. But for Trump,
Cuba is likely as much a domestic issue
as it is a foreign policy one.
That said, the compensation claim could
easily derail any broader agreement.
According to the Assembly of the Cuban
Resistance, which is an anti-government
organization operating both inside and
outside the country, the total claim
amounts to roughly 9 to 10 billion
dollars. Given Cuba's worsening economic
conditions, Havana is in no position to
pay such a fee. If the Cuban leadership
refuses to meet US demands or if talks
collapse altogether, the Pentagon may
opt for military intervention.
At first, the campaign would likely
remain indirect. The US could increase
surveillance operations around Cuba,
deploy warships near the island, and
carry out military drills across the
Caribbean in an effort to pressure
Havana into concessions. But if those
measures fail to produce results, the
Pentagon could escalate by launching
airstrikes against military
infrastructure and government
facilities, followed by special
operations raids targeting senior
officials.
But even if no military action is taken,
the threat of it must remain at an
all-time high. The Cubans are notorious
for their slow diplomacy and will only
concede if they believe that their fate,
properties, and even lives are in real
danger. If the US delegation shows up to
the talks without the looming threat of
military intervention, the negotiations
will outlast Trump's presidency with
little to show for it. And so, the
Pentagon must flex its muscles while
diplomats do their thing.
In Washington, policy makers may be
hoping for a repeat of the Maduro
operation, but that may not be an option
in this case. After nearly seven decades
of communist rule, there is no person
within the Cuban system capable of
delivering meaningful change to the
country. No one with a consistent track
record of standing for economic
liberalization, not even in a modest
way. So, even if Díaz-Canel were forced
into exile, it remains unclear whether a
more cooperative alternative is waiting
to take his place.
On the other hand, Cuba has few
alternatives left. Without oil,
conditions will continue to deteriorate
until they become unbearable,
potentially triggering another wave of
anti-government protests. Recognizing
the risk, Cuba has begun to acquiesce to
some of the US demands. In March, it
introduced new regulations allowing
expatriates to own businesses in the
country, and in April, it released 2,000
political prisoners. But so far, those
concessions have done little to appease
the White House.
Part of the reason is that the pressure
campaign against Cuba may no longer be
driven solely by strategic calculations.
After all, Cuba is hardly the sort of
threat that normally warrants this kind
of response. You see, unlike Venezuela,
it doesn't possess vast oil reserves.
And unlike Iran, it has no nuclear
weapons program. And while Trump may be
drawn to the idea of resolving a problem
that has frustrated 12 presidents before
him, the driving force behind the US
policy may in fact be Secretary of State
Marco Rubio.
As the son of Cuban immigrants, Rubio
has long viewed Cuba not just as a
geopolitical issue, but as a deeply
personal one. For years, he argued for
stronger US efforts to topple the Cuban
government. He was also one of the
strongest critics of Obama's
normalization attempt and has since
become the face of this administration's
posture toward Latin America.
Rubio is one of the few people in
Washington who still sees Cuba as a
priority for the United States. More
importantly, he has the political
credibility to sell a deal not only on
Capitol Hill and in Miami, but
potentially even in Havana. That makes
him both a threat and an opportunity to
the Cuban government.
He's an opportunity because he has
hinted at a more gradual approach,
saying that change in Cuba doesn't have
to happen all at once because everyone
is mature and realistic. In practice,
that could mean introducing reforms
slowly while keeping much of the
existing system intact. But such an
arrangement would be deeply
controversial.
Many Cuban exiles, anti-government
groups, and members of Congress would
see it as legitimizing the communist
government in Havana, especially since
the Helms-Burton Act ties the removal of
the embargo to conditions such such free
elections and the dismantling of Cuba's
state security apparatus.
Rubio, however, may be the only person
in America with even a remote chance of
navigating that massive political maze.
At times, a breakthrough abroad depends
on whether the politics at home allow
it.
Remember to play Supremacy World War 3
for free on PC or mobile. Use the link
in the description to claim the elite
railgun bonus available for the next 30
days.
I've been your host Sherwan from Caspian
Report. If you enjoy these videos,
consider supporting the channel on
Patreon and click the bell icon so the
next one doesn't slip past you. Thank
you for your time and salaam.